you're watching maverick media educate
organize act
you
[Music]
can we just slip back a little bit there
so because of this little movement to
cover up things there's so much that the
American people don't have soap if you
are just for the education of our
audience could you talk a little bit
about iran-contra and the October
Surprise how Reagan is out his office in
the first place right well this is sort
of one of those funny stories because we
learned part of it and then you sort of
go back in time instead of being a sort
of a narrative you structure one place
as you move to the end iran-contra was
when we people were shocked to find out
in 1986 that the Reagan administration
was secretly selling arms to Iran which
had which was which was had been
governed by Ayatollah Khomeini since
1979 it was a radical Islamic state it
had held back in 1979 52 Americans had
been seized as hostages that that that
hostage crisis had lasted 444 days this
Iran's government was seen as very
disreputable it had been involved it
would get became involved in a war with
with Iraq at starting in 1980 which went
on for eight years so in the middle of
this we find out we begin to find out
that Reagan's people were tilting in one
way to Iraq secretly providing them
assistance but also selling weapons to
the Iranians basically working both
sides now so we began to sort of unpeel
this onion and and and we end up finding
that that there was that there were
their words that there was a whole
network of arms dealers and how they
were functioning and often we'd run into
Israel was a key middleman in this
operation which also seems odd to people
because people thought of Israel being
an enemy of
I ran arrange to talk about the great
state in the United States the little
Satan Israel but there was a whole
different reality they begin to be come
into focus with iran-contra that
sometimes where people say even when
they're denouncing each other isn't
really what's happening behind the
scenes they can be collaborating so so
iran-contra became a story partly of how
to understand what happened and the way
it was sort of soldier was at that time
was that this begins about 8485 when
there are some overtures from the
Iranians who want some weapons
the Israelis sort of intervened to sort
of help that happen the the Reagan
people agree because Iran is offering to
help with some other hostage crisis in
Lebanon and and ultimately the u.s.
takes over the shipments directly first
ad they do it through Israel and later
more directly from American stockpiles
but that turns out only part of the
story what we learned later as we go
through this is that the weapons
shipments did not begin in 1985 and 86
they actually could trace back further
and further in time and we learned that
by certainly by 81 at the very start of
the Reagan presidency the the US
government was approving Israeli sales
of weapons to Iran and one of the
shipments actually was shot down in June
of 1981 because it's straight over the
Soviet Union it was it was shot down and
we learned later from a guy who was the
assistant secretary of state
nicholasville Yodas that he had he had
gone to his higher-ups and said what's
happening with this what's going on here
and he learned from them that this was a
an approved US government operation and
he came to believe that the actual
connections between the Republicans and
the Iranians dated back to the campaign
of 1980 and that Reagan Reagan's people
were in touch with the Iranians then and
and this fit with various allegations
that had come hard to come out from arms
dealers intelligence operatives who had
said they were part of this operation
and they began to describe in some
detail these the way these deals
actually began and so you have to go
back then to 1980 and I was hired
actually by Public Broadcasting's
frontline program to look into this and
what we discovered was that there was
substantial evidence that after the
hostage crisis begins in 1979 a Jimmy
Carter President Carter was fighting for
his political survival is desperately
trying to get the hostages out and he's
finding that the Israelis of the coudé
government of Menachem Bagan is
interfering with him they're there
they're trying to do deals with the
Iranians and Carter finds out in March
of 18 from Israel to the Iranians and
he's furious and he confronts beggin
beggin is very angry with Carter because
Carter had pushed him into the Camp
David peace agreement where Israel had
surrendered the Sinai back to Egypt in
exchange for an Egyptian agreement for
peace now that might sound like a good
thing to many people but begging was
very upset about it and they'll cooed
was very afraid that if Carter got a
second term he would force them to make
a fuller deal with the Palestinians and
he that that Israel will be forced into
a two-state solution which at that time
it did not want so for the Israelis they
saw Carter's reelection in 1980 as a
tremendous threat so it appears they
began collaborating with the Republicans
who had their own interests obviously
and seeing Carter defeated in other
groups sort of got involved to the
Saudis did not want Carter when they
felt he was weak they didn't want not
one to have happened to them what
happened to the Shah of Iran in 1979
when he was thrown out so there was
there was certain commonality of
interest Carter turned out was facing a
lot of people whose interests were
diametrically opposed to his and there
were also conservative European
politicians and intelligence people who
who thought he was the Carter was being
too soft on the Soviet Union they wanted
to ratchet up the Cold War again
so basically there are a lot of people
willing to collaborate with the
Republicans in this in these contacts
with uranium's to see that Carter didn't
get credit for getting the hostage sound
and that the hostage crisis would
continue as kind of an albatross around
Carter's neck which it did it so
happened coincidentally that the the
first anniversary of the hostage crisis
was the day of the election in 1980 so
Americans really focused on this
humiliation that they'd been subjected
to for a year and it played into
Reagan's message or that the United
States needs to be tougher stronger
means to build up our military again be
respected in the world so it just played
very well for Reagan played very badly
for Carter and as the and after the
election where which which Reagan one
rather decisively then the the
settlement was finally reached with the
Iranians and it and almost simultaneous
with Reagan being sworn in on January
20th 81 the hostages are released to
great celebration in the United States
and the American people therefore had
this had this impression that Ronald
Reagan was a tough guy who could get
things done so it was a very important
impetus to the start of the Reagan
presidency that that here was Reagan
being sworn in our enemies the Iranians
you know cough up the hostages and the
Republicans put out this joke there was
a joke which was you know what's what's
three feet deep and glows in the dark
and the answer was rot Tehran ten
minutes after Ronald Reagan becomes
president so the idea was that were
tough with our enemies they will they
will do what we want and so that was a
message to get started and it helped
carry Reagan through much of his his
first his first term this idea that he
was this guy who was not this uninvolved
guy on the national on the international
stage he could actually be a real player
so and so it also cemented the idea of
Carter being a weakling and the
Democrats being weak so it was a very
important political development I would
say to a bourbon tonic
look on October Surprise where she says
that the negotiations were specifically
to not release the hostages until the
day that Reagan was inaugurated which is
what happened there's a lot of evidence
to support that I mean I Barbra Hana has
done some good work the problem has been
the problem was some of this is that as
with any of these very sensitive secrets
there's an old line from Churchill that
that the bill Casey the CIA director was
Reagan's campaign manager in 1980 liked
to say and it was truth is so valuable
it must be protected by a battalion of
lies and so what would happen sometimes
is that they're doing people who would
intervene into these stories who would
tell you some things that are partly
true and they would tell you some things
that weren't and get them very careful
to evaluate these kinds of people there
are some real there's some real
witnesses real sources and then there
are people like this and sometimes some
of them Barbara I think was a bit too
trusting of some of those people I mean
she's not a trained journalist shoes she
was a person in the Reagan
administration
and so she to say at some point those
kinds of people then they detonate
behind you after they after you've used
them then they can say well see I was
making stuff up and that discredits the
whole story even though the story may be
very real so you have that problem and
requires requires a lot of care not to
be burned like that it's very hard not
to be in some cases because these are
stories where there are very intricate
pieces of them and you do have someone
who actually seems to know part of a
story but then might give you some
element of it that's wrong how do the
repercussions from them play out now
well we don't Americans just don't know
that history at all I mean the October
Surprise story is still considered very
questionable the conventional wisdom in
Washington is that it was a conspiracy
theory run while and despite the fact
there was there's enormous hard evidence
we have documents we have witnesses we
have a we have essentially very filled
up narrative of how it occurred it was
attacked aggressively not
just by the Republicans but by some key
elements of the news media the New
Republic which is which is switch from a
liberal paper or magazine to a
neoconservative one did a hatchet job on
the on the topic
Newsweek my old colleagues at Newsweek
went after it and also attacked it very
poorly done congressional investigation
was put together under under congressman
Lee Hamilton which concocted absurd
alibis for people to say they couldn't
have been involved in this one one of my
favorite alibis they used was that on
some key date for Bill Casey who was
then the director of the Reagan campaign
the the investigation said that because
someone had written down his home phone
number on a certain date that that
proved that Casey was at home and you
know when yes when you say well was
there was there phone call the person
who wrote down the name said I had no
recollection of actually calling Casey
there's no record record of the call
going through but because someone had
written down
Casey's home phone number that was
considered conclusive proof that Casey
was at home he's like absurd arguments
they were put together by this
by this congressional investigation and
which was finishing its work in 92
Laight 90 293 and they basically sort of
judged that nothing had happened on this
later on I was able to access some of
their own some of their documents and
they left they left boxes of documents
behind and in late 94 after the
Republicans won control of Congress I
think this is my last chance probably to
get hold of some of these documents so I
convinced some folks on the House
Foreign Affairs Committee to let me
access them and I was led to this this
room this office I never knew existed it
was in the Rayburn House parking garage
and it was sort of an overflow kind of
office I guess for the House Foreign
Affairs Committee and led to the back to
the back of these warren of offices and
there was an abandoned ladies room and
in the abandoned ladies room they had
dumped these boxes of documents that
they had generated in this october
surprise investigation
and I and there's those just the
unclassified material but I started
opening up these documents and they'd
left behind secret and top secret
material so I would the person who
they're supposedly watching me was sort
of busy with other stuff so I I
volunteered to float to photostats the
documents myself and cover it up the top
secret and ran there was big old copier
it kept breaking down I volunteer to fix
it and I was able to sort of get to
extract some of these documents they
limited me to 12 copies each visit so I
went back several times I was able to
extract the best I thought of the 36 or
so pages I was allowed but these
documents were remarkable in that what
it made clear was that this house
investigation had especially toward the
end of its time was being flooded with
evidence that indeed the October
Surprise story was true that there was
that that the Republicans had pulled
this off yet they went ahead and they
sent out and I later learned from the
chief counsel Larry Barcella so I called
him up at one point and said how could
you let this stuff go and he said well
he said truth is that he had because so
much was coming in late in the
investigation about the Republicans
actually having done this he went to Lee
Hamilton the Chairman and said we have
to extend the investigation several
months to evaluate all this evidence and
Hamilton said no that would require me
going back and getting an extension from
the Congress and let's just wrap it up
and say nothing happened so they
basically put out a report they put
together a report which we went to the
printers in January of 1993 and just
weeks before Bill Clinton gets
inaugurated it was due out on January
13th the week before Bill Clinton was to
be inaugurated and and then to their
surprise on January 11th the Russian
government in perhaps an unprecedented
step of cooperation with the United
States sent a report to Lee Hamilton the
Hamilton sort of approach them as you'd
approach others and said what do you
have in your intelligence files on this
topic and the Russian Center reports
saying that the Republicans had these
meetings and care
and Madrid with the Iranians that they
named number the people involved they
described some things I had never heard
of some dealings also the Carter was
trying to do on his part the Russians
had a very good feel for this according
to this report they are their own
intelligence files obviously we're
following Iran very closely and we know
they penetrated European intelligence
they actually penetrated the CIA and
they and US intelligence we now know so
they had all this information and they
deliver it to Lee Hamilton on January
11th the reports already gone to the
printers so what do you do what Lee
Hamilton did was a stuck in in this box
and ended up being dumped in this ladies
room and they didn't release it to the
American people it was classified I
asked Parcells I said why didn't you
just release their report because
obviously if they had if they had
released at that time they'd have to
also admit that their report which was
already at the printers wasn't worth the
paper that was being printed on if the
russians were telling the truth can were
right so they they put this report away
and when I asked Barcella well why
didn't they just at least release that
Declassified and releases say well it
was classified Bob and it would require
us having gone through some steps to
declassify it and then he said I kind of
he said Barcella said I kind of
envisioned it like that last scene in
Raiders of the Lost Ark you know where
they're taking the Ark and they're going
into this warehouse and there is being
shoved into this giant government
warehouse he said I kind of envisioned
the documents ending up there so you
know so he knew it was the chief counsel
and he knew they had taken it dies at
least the level that they did not
examine some of this very powerful
evidence that they were they were
getting at the end of the investigation
so I mean that's how that in the sense
is how our history gets done and and if
you end it if you don't get lucky if
people aren't out there digging and to
some degree getting lucky finding stuff
it remains hidden for the American
people probably forever yeah for our
viewers I just want
very quickly one of the reason we're
getting into the October Surprise here
is absent example of one case of
something it was very important but the
American people know nothing about knew
nothing about or knew very little about
and if we have time with Robert we could
probably go into dozens of similar
stories that the American people have no
idea about what happened so Robert Hart
how does that play out with what's going
on in Iran now is there in connection
with what happened way back then and our
relationship with Iran now or what's
going on in the Middle East well it's
always dangerous when a country doesn't
know the history of its relationship
with another country the American people
if they are indeed going to be
supposedly people in charge in a
democracy in a Democratic Republic need
to know what the facts are otherwise
they're just children being played with
now so so they're it's easy to sell
people a story if they don't know all
this fairly complex history at least to
some level and the Americans don't know
that they don't know where the history
of our relationship with Iraq the Iraq
aid scandal of the reagan-bush people
giving weapons and materiel to Saddam
Hussein also was hidden from the
American people pretty effectively so
you have so you have this we wind up
being put into these conflicts where the
government gets to tell us kind of the
narrative and it's not necessarily the
real narrative it can be essentially a
false narrative can be something that if
you knew the facts you'd say that's not
right so in the case of Iran there are
not only the fact that there was this
curious relationship between the
Republicans and uranium's going back to
this period also many of the key figures
who in the iran-contra scandal from the
Iranian side are still around and
interestingly they're what we now call
the opposition and this is a significant
point because again the American press
has chosen not to sort of exclude
certain facts from the debate about Iran
now for instance
it was reported a couple of years ago
and
we've sort of had this confirm that that
george w bush signed a intelligence
finding to spend roughly four hundred
million dollars on destabilizing the
iranian government and that was
considered really a good idea of among
many people at the time but what that
included was efforts to build up a
political opposition to have regime
change in Iran yet what's been left out
of these stories when we talk about this
the election in Iran on June 12th of
2009 is the fact that there is there is
reason for the Iranians to suspect
whether rightly or wrongly that the
United States is trying to mess up their
political situation something the United
States of course did back in 1953 with
the overthrow of prime minister
Mosaddegh so it's not like this is
completely far-fetched this is a history
to it
and just a year or two ago we were
reporting about this four hundred
million dollar plan that George Bush had
to to wreak havoc so so the Iranians are
freaked out they think that we see these
the people involved in the opposition
might have some ties to foreign interest
to sort of change their government
whether or not that should happen eyes
another question but that's certainly a
concern that the Iranian government has
it turns out also that that three of the
key figures in the opposition have been
a long time had longtime relationships
with the Israelis and the United States
you have for instance of Mousavi they
who was the leader of the opposition now
he was Prime Minister back in the 1980s
he was dealing with the irate with
Israelis and with the Americans he was
essentially a mop of gabon afar's
control officer and Gabanna for was the
Iranian who was dealing with with
Michael Levine the neoconservative
working for the State Department and
Oliver North so it when when north when
alig north and and bud McFarlane the
National Security Adviser were flying
over to Iran with
the Bible and the cake which was sort of
infamous event they were going to meet
Mousavi so Mesabi had this relationship
with the americans through and with the
israelis roth's and johnny another key
figure in the in the iranian opposition
was was essentially made a wealthy man
because of the arms deals that he was
handling with the israelis and in kuruvi
whose mo perhaps the most controversial
member of this opposition triumvirate
was a guy who was implicated in the
October Surprise he was one of the guys
and supposedly met allegedly met with
Casey and others in the American
government to try to sabotage Carter's
efforts to get the hostages out he and
his brother Hassan kuruvi then were like
key figures later on when you get to the
85-86 timeframe of arranging the weapons
that the Americans sent through Israel
to Iran so you have these three guys who
have intelligence ties to the Israelis
and the Americans now that's the sort of
fact that you know maybe it's irrelevant
maybe maybe these guys are not at this
time working for the Americans or the
Israelis but that's the kind of detail
that the American people should be told
because it does bear on what's happening
in Iran but you can't find that even
though some of this is in Walsh's
iran-contra report the official the
official investigative report on Iran
Contra it sort of has become it's gone
into the memory hole there also been
books that have that that have described
these disease details but again they're
not raised by the New York Times or The
Washington Post or the other major news
organizations which seem to have joined
the campaign to gin up this hatred of
Iran much as they did in 2002 and 2003
about Iraq in both cases this history
has this inconvenient history has been
shunted aside and very few Americans
know it you know I don't think very many
Americans know about listed it well in
1953 Prime Minister Mossadegh it was a
democratically elected leader of Iran
wanted to nationalize Iranian oil
reserves which have been controlled
mostly by the British this was running
early stages of CIA and the British
intelligence and the CIA got together to
overthrow most days and at one point of
when I was working on the October
Surprise story for PBS Frontline I had
the chance to interview miles Copeland
who was one of the CIA officers who had
engaged in this and we sat down and he
described how 1953 he and Kermit
Roosevelt
Archie Roosevelt and other legendary CIA
officers got together and went into Iran
with bags of money and they spread the
money around at the bazaars to get
people to go and demonstrate against
Mosaddegh they also did propaganda
campaign against Mosaddegh betraying
kind of a flaky guy they they pointed
out that he would he'd wear his bathrobe
in his office things like that
to sort of undermine and with the
Iranian people and ultimately this was
successful in forcing Mosaddegh out and
Mosaddegh was replaced by the Shah of
Iran who who was willing to more or less
play ball with the US and the and the
Brits so it was the way that the United
States and Great Britain did intervene
in Iranian affairs very successfully
from the point of view of the Americans
and the Brits to put their guy back in
power and get rid of this guy who wanted
to nationalize the oil reserves so
that's a good example of how that during
that period especially the CIA was very
proud of its ability to intervene in
these different countries and and and
put in the people that the u.s. wanted
and get rid of those that the US did not
want the American people are told
repeatedly that we are going to the aid
of our allies and the support of
democracies and Mossadegh loathes
domestic democratically elected well
there is a tendency to sort of like
democracy when the results are what the
United States wanted and then hate it
when it's not you know there's the case
of Algeria where where there was an
election in the 90s and the in the end
the Islamists won that wasn't the right
answer so the Islamists were blocked
from taking power the
Algerian military took control and
essentially started a civil war was
slaughtered many of these llamas we've
seen more recently in Palestine where
there was an election that the Bush
administration pushed for but Hamas won
and that was are the wrong answers so so
the United States has then ratcheted up
the pain on the on the Palestinians is
sort of punishment for voting the wrong
way so there is this this tendency to do
that there's also this idea that you can
do sort of what they call Velvet
revolutions where the u.s. pours money
into one side and does use the
propaganda techniques that have been
very well refined by now and then and
then they'll be immediate claims by this
say that the u.s. backside doesn't win
it will immediately claim that did win
and then they'll be demonstrations and
protests demanding that the side that US
did not like that may have actually one
step down in favor of the side that
really lost and we've seen that
technique used and that's what the
Iranians suspect is happening after it
happened after the June election because
Mousavi even before a single vote was
counted declared that he was the victor
and then when the tallies came in
favoring Oxendine Asad Ahmed evil so no
we won and then then Mousavi said no you
didn't it was rigged it was it was fraud
and there's been really no evidence of
fraud there's been basically what
Mousavi side really claims is that och
Medina jawed side had provided jobs pay
raises and food to many the poor people
and that that led the poor people to
vote for often you know John and the
Mousavi people fulfill that's unfair and
you one can argue that it wasn't fair
but that's one more machine politics not
fraud and so but but the fraud message
has been sold by the New York Times in
the Washington Post and other major news
organizations uncritically to the
American people and there's a real
question it's very possible that dr.
Medina shot one legitimately
[Music]
you